disabled in active users.
This is Ah,
another lesson where,
um the security comes in.
And,
um,
not like actual security.
I mean,
the security concerns you are that this the users who are not logged into the system for a
certain number off days should be next.
Um,
so we will run the command in this lesson toe,
identify those users,
And how does it work in a real world?
Well,
it happened to me many people,
and I'm sure might have happened to you,
too,
that your boss comes to you and says,
Hey,
give me a list Of all the users who haven't been logging for the past three months or a
year,
well,
you could do two things with This is one who pre people who are already working in your
environment and and they just don't have the need to log in anymore.
So you want to go and and to leave their account.
That's why second reason people who have left the company and somehow you missed Ah,
one of the servers are a few servers where you forgot to delete user account off that
person who left the company.
So of course,
it's a security concern,
right?
If the user account is still there,
well,
mistakes do happen.
And you do forget to the lead user account on certain number of servers.
Actually,
if you have 1000 servers and forget about it.
So what do you need to do?
You have to implement some kind of automation tools that will run,
Um,
like after 90 days or after year,
or whatever the number off days you wanted to run ritual,
pick up all these users that haven't been logged into the system,
and it will simply disabled you.
Go sit leader if you want to.
But the better disabled.
So this is what we're gonna do in this lesson.
Well,
first identify the users.
Then we will create a scrip.
We'll create two type of script.
One script is Four Loops Script,
which will look for all the users and disabled the inactive account.
That there's the second script.
Double create is will be exactly same script,
but we will use X argument demand,
which is a newer commander.
I'll show you that could be used in scripting language to take the input from the command
and execute.
You know,
another command on So that's how we will do.
Ah,
and so let's ah,
log into our machine,
our legs machine.
No.
Again,
As I said,
um,
I have created these scripts for you already to say time.
So the script that I first created as let's V I.
That script and I name it disabled users four four.
Meaning,
is this a script I did for four?
What it does is,
of course,
to find the variable and all the or third a description,
modified comments.
Then it's gonna run.
This command last logged till correct AUC these few commands to identify those users.
Now,
why am I picking these good question.
First of all,
last log is the command which will give you all the list of users have been logged.
You could use last as well as last log,
but last log is much efficient for this purpose.
Then till dash minus two day tail minus and plus two meaning get rid of the first line off
the up,
which I'll show you in a minute.
What is the first line?
So if I open up a duplicate session,
that's log in as root and if I run last log you will see hopes as do more you see at the
top.
This is a line that comes up that you don't want to get.
So that's why I'm using the option.
Last long tail minus and plus two to minus end less to and just doom or again.
And you will see that first line that was showing up is not showing up again.
So that's why I'm using No,
that,
uh,
minus and plus two,
then next one is group test zero.
So now,
if you wanted to disable those accounts that haven't been logged into the system for 90
days,
then you have to use the command.
Um,
I believe it's ah,
last log minus B 90.
So this will give you all the uses that haven't been logged into the system for the last 90
days up.
Sorry.
I have to remove the piper eso these other uses that had never haven't been logged in.
So now you also notice that they are There are other users that are systems users like
route or male operator games or nobody or FTP.
You don't want to get rid off or disable these accounts,
so you would have to actually make sure that you put some kind of grew up inside that,
uh,
we're moving,
filtering out some off them and or you could just,
um,
run this command and grip it against all the users in etc.
Password file.
And you could actually do for either people who have home directory or group minus B for
those who actually have the user like no log.
And so let's see if you do cat see password.
You see,
all the users that our system users are have no log in and user that actually created
encounter in law again.
Have this sash home directly with it.
So you could specify different options,
different grub commands to get rid of those.
But anyway,
let's ah,
let's go back to our command.
This is a command that will give you all the uses that been never logged in or have not
been logging for 90 days.
So for my test purposes,
this lab I created a script,
um,
cat disabled user for so this script,
what it will do is it will actually do the same thing last law.
But instead of minus B 90 because this again,
this is a test to show you how to delete the system and how to create a scrip I just
removed minus B minus 90.
Uh,
kept the till till command.
And now I'm groping for only test.
Ah,
why I'm graphical Because I do have a test account in there that I'll show you in this
exercise.
It's ironic,
Will.
See,
I have two tests account so this command will grapple the used to test account and then it
will use the command.
Use Ahmad minus l two disabled account.
So let's v I this script again.
And here,
If you want to specify,
let's say if you want to grab minus B sorry with minus a not not a a C minus VfB and you
are to exclude.
Never you could do that and then print out all those user.
But since we're doing the test,
only who will pick the test once and now you'll see this is going to disable all the test
the old accounts that matches test.
So instead of doing for,
uh,
so for now,
I will use the four command for in the variable dollar A,
which is getting from here,
is putting in the variable A it's doing use Ahmad,
and minus l option is to disable the list and done so instead of just for test.
I will do,
um cat dollar I for now,
and Allah is put,
but ah,
comment here.
So I don't want to delete it right now,
so I will just check What are those users?
Let's run it.
Four obsesses.
No such father directory.
What happened?
Let's take a look.
Four.
Um,
last logged.
This is what it's giving us the entire list of fuses and then we're doing is we're putting
this list for I in into the eye and then Oh,
we not care.
You don't have to care.
We have to echo just to see what are those?
Clear the screen.
Disabled uses for Luke.
Okay,
so here's a list of all these users that have not been logged in,
but it's still not correct because I just wanted to grope test.
Right.
Let's take a look at the disabled account for and I want to all I did the minus V to
exclude.
I don't want to exclude.
I want to grab only those because,
as it said again,
this is just for test.
Now let's see and you run.
It gives me only those users.
So now I have identified these other uses of you want to disable,
Go in and,
um,
disabled user for script.
And this time I will.
Instead of echo,
I will get rid of that line,
put user mode myself and whatever the user returns disabled.
Perfect.
Before I run this script,
I will verify it that I could log in with the use it is going to disable.
It was going to disable test 123 and I'm logging in and you will see it has logged in
Perfect.
So now I could get rid off this,
and now I'll run my scrip.
The script ran.
Now let's say now it should have disabled those accounts.
Let's say if I log back in test 123 in the password and there you go.
So it's not gonna let me get in.
It's his access denied.
I know it has disabled those accounts.
And to verify it,
you'll see you could do grip test one just or just test.
And at sea,
Shadow Shadow is the one that actually puts the exclamation point right here that would
tell that this account should be deceived to be right here If I just modified,
etc.
Shadow fall and look for test.
I could remove this exclamation point and I'll sort of more exclamation point here.
So now I should be able to log back in and tow Log back in my comm,
my user is test 123 and password and bingo.
A lot Exit out again.
Run again from the command again and it should have logged.
Locked the count.
Try again and it's not letting me in excess and perfect.
The script works.
So now this is the one way to a disabled user account using a for loop.
Another script I wanted to show you to do the same thing is,
um SV Eyes I have created a script for you guys already is ex argument script.
So what is going to do is in Skinner,
instead of specifying the variable and then running the four loop and then going through
the whole process,
it's gonna run that script right here,
do everything growth for test and AUC those.
And instead of that putting into a variable,
I am actually passing that too.
As an argument,
I put an X argument and minus I option curly braces,
meaning Whatever comes in as a result from this command,
do use Ahmad lock these account.
It's just that simple.
In so doing the four loop command,
you can also specify what you wanted to do with exact same line in one command.
So let's try it.
Let's try to run it.
But before we run it,
um,
we already have disabled those,
um um,
account.
So I'm gonna enable them again by going to see Shadow,
look for test accounts and get rid off exclamation point exclamation point and save.
Now,
when I run this disabled ex argument,
it should have disabled those I could verify by doing Grab test on Etsy Shadow and you will
see it has put that exclamation point.
It's doing the same thing as four Luke doing,
but it's a different way,
so I have to descriptors that you need to learn one as cat Oh,
sorry,
one as disabled for,
and the 2nd 1 is disabled arguments.
So both doing the same thing as you see again.
If you wanted to do the test with me,
you would have to create test account before using this before doing this exercise.
Um,
I actually I will actually add that to my video at the beginning by editing it.
But anyway,
if you if you if you are listening to the message you know already that this mess,
this lesson has been edited for you to create account first,
which are test 123 or test 345 or whichever account that you wanted to Ah,
you want to disable and do your lab for